Copyright (c) 2009 Carnegie Mellon University.
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

   * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

   * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
     the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
     distribution.

   * Neither the name of Carnegie Mellon University nor the Software
     Engineering Institute and its employees may be used to endorse or
     promote products derived from this software without specific
     prior written permission from permission@sei.cmu.edu.

NO WARRANTY
ANY SOFTWARE, INFORMATION, MATERIALS, SERVICES, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
OR OTHER PROPERTY OR RIGHTS GRANTED OR PROVIDED BY CARNEGIE MELLON
PURSUANT TO THIS AGREEMENT (HEREINAFTER THE "DELIVERABLES") ARE ON AN
"AS-IS" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, MERCHANTABILITY,
INFORMATIONAL CONTENT, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR ERROR-FREE
OPERATION. CARNEGIE MELLON SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER CARNEGIE MELLON WAS AWARE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU WILL NOT MAKE ANY
WARRANTY ON BEHALF OF CARNEGIE MELLON, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, TO ANY
PERSON CONCERNING THE APPLICATION OF OR THE RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED
WITH THE DELIVERABLES UNDER THIS AGREEMENT.

By using this software, you hereby agree to defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless Carnegie Mellon, its trustees, officers, employees, and
agents from all claims or demands made against them (and any related
losses, expenses, or attorney's fees) arising out of, or relating to
Licensee's and/or its sub licensees' negligent use or willful misuse
of or negligent conduct or willful misconduct regarding the Software,
facilities, or other rights or assistance granted by Carnegie Mellon
under this Agreement, including, but not limited to, any claims of
product liability, personal injury, death, damage to property, or
violation of any laws or regulations.

Carnegie Mellon University Software Engineering Institute authored
materials are sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense under
Contract F19628-00-C-0003. Carnegie Mellon University retains
copyrights in all material produced under this contract. The
U.S. Government retains a non-exclusive, royalty-free license to
publish or reproduce these materials, or allow others to do so, for
U.S. Government purposes only pursuant to the copyright license under
the contract clause at 252.227.7013.